<script>
  import {
    DateDistance as DD, 
    DateUpdated, 
    Small, 
  } from '$lib/components'
</script>

<Small>
  Last updated: <DateUpdated date="2023-09-16" small="true" />
</Small>

## Short

Scott is a Svelte ambassador, application team lead, and international
conference speaker with a passion for creating video and written
content for educating others on Svelte and SvelteKit.

## Medium

Meet Scott, the application team lead and Svelte ambassador who
creates engaging written and video content, with a special focus on
Svelte and SvelteKit.

As an experienced international conference speaker and meetup
presenter, they're passionate about connecting with and educating
others in the Svelte community.

Their informative blog ([scottspence.com](https:scottspence.com)),
(receiving around 16k visitors and 30k views monthly) showcases their
commitment to giving back to the community.

## Long

Scott, with <DD date="2018-03-18" /> years of commercial experience in
working in development teams using frameworks like Svelte and React,
they bring a wealth of knowledge. With <DD date="2016-06-15" /> of
experience in using JavaScript, HTML, and CSS.

As a Svelte ambassador, they are passionate about creating video
content to support their extensive knowledge with a special focus on
Svelte and SvelteKit. They are also an international conference
speaker and experienced meetup presenter, connecting with and
educating others in the Svelte community.

Their blog receives around 16k visitors and 30k views monthly,
showcasing their ability to produce engaging and informative content.
They are always looking for new ways to give back to the Svelte
community and share their expertise. Prior to their work as a
JavaScript developer, they worked as a senior-level Analyst Developer
specializing in Microsoft Office automation for large financial
organizations.

In their spare time, they enjoy staying up-to-date with the latest
trends in technology, attending industry events related to Svelte and
SvelteKit, and participating in educational opportunities. They are a
dedicated professional, always looking for ways to improve their
skills and give back to the community.
