<script>
  import {
    DateDistance as DD, 
    DateUpdated, 
    Small, 
  } from '$lib/components'
</script>

<Small>
  Last updated: <DateUpdated date="2023-09-16" small="true" />
</Small>

## Short

Scott Spence is a applications team lead specializing in Svelte and
SvelteKit with <DD date="2021-04-06" /> experience using it. They're
an experienced conference speaker and digital content specialist,
producing engaging content to educate the Svelte community.

## Medium

Scott Spence, a skilled and dedicated applications team lead who
creates video content to support their extensive knowledge on Svelte
and SvelteKit.

They're an experienced international conference speaker and meetup
presenter, connecting with and educating others in the Svelte
community.

Their blog receives around 16k visitors and 30k views monthly,
showcasing their ability to produce engaging and informative content.
They're always looking for ways to improve their skills and give back
to the community.

## Long

With <DD date="2018-03-18" /> of commercial experience in working in
development teams. Scott Spence is a results-oriented applications
team with experience in working in development teams delivering
projects, specializing in Svelte. With <DD date="2016-06-15" /> of
experience in using JavaScript, HTML, and CSS. With commercial
experience in using frameworks like Svelte and React, they bring a
wealth of knowledge to the table.

They specialize in creating video content to support their extensive
knowledge with a focus on Svelte. They're an experienced international
conference speaker and meetup presenter, connecting with and educating
others in the Svelte community.

Their blog receives around 16k visitors and 30k views monthly,
showcasing their ability to produce engaging and informative content.
With a track record of success in previous senior-level Analyst
Developer roles specializing in Microsoft Office automation for large
financial organizations, they have a keen eye for detail and a passion
for excellence.

In their spare time, they attend industry events related to Svelte,
participate in educational opportunities, and stay up-to-date with the
latest trends in technology. They're a dedicated professional, always
looking for ways to improve their skills and give back to the
community.
