---
date: 2017-03-15
title: Code life balance
tags: ['career']
isPrivate: false
---

Just some rationalisation of what I'm currently doing.

Recently I have decided that I'm going to improve my current skill
set. To do this I'm studying with freeCodeCamp for a full stack
developer certification, I'm also trying to learn as much as I can
about the languages that come with that HTML, CSS and JavaScript as
well as getting familiar with everything else in between like Git and
GitHub, development environments like Cloud9 and services like Digital
Ocean and AWS.

To do all of this I need time and being married with a young family
and having a full time job my time is at a premium.

The freeCodeCamp curriculum is 2,080 hours, so let's break that down
quickly.

Like I said with a full time job and a family spare time is precious,
I have taken to getting up most mornings around an hour earlier than
usual @~05:30 that gave me around 1.5 hours before having to get ready
for the day taking kids to school and the daily commute. In the
evenings I usually have from 20:00‚Äì22:00 but this is full of
interruptions so you could probably condense it down to about 1.5
hours again.

<!-- cSpell:ignore gollum -->

![gollum]

So.

Let say I'm laser focussed and relentlessly do 1 hour in the morning
and 3 hours in the evening 4 hours a day 2,080/4 so 520 days? That's
1.4 years, wow! Ok now let's be a bit more realistic, 1 hour in the
morning 1 hour in the evening, 1040 = 2.85 nearly 3 years, oh!

Ok, so what if I was a full time student? 8 hours a day 1,080/8=135
three months! How much do I want this then?

Currently I'm managing 45min-1hour in the AM then 1hr-2hrs in the PM
so at very best I could manage to finish the curriculum in a year,
that's if I finish the curriculum at all, I read loads of posts about
how people have managed to get full time developer jobs after only
doing half of the freeCodeCamp curriculum this doesn't help. It's
great to see success stories and inspiring to read but a lot of the
time this adds unnecessary pressure on yourself.

My family are great and understand the situation but your
relationships are priority and they can get a bit strained when all
you're doing is staring at a monitor whenever you get a spare 45
minutes.

![fcc breakdown]

[#100DaysOfCode] has been a great tool for me with regard to building
good habits and something that has both distracted me from purely
concentrating on my freeCodeCamp and also accelerated my GitHub open
source interactions. Since starting the challenge I have contributed
to several GitHub projects and made some of my own.

I have also created a personal goals repo like the one Una Kravets has
on her GitHub this will be what I'll use going forward after I have
completed the 100 Days of Code challenge, I'm not going to take part
in the 301 days of code challenge as I'd like to go on holiday without
having to think about any coding for a week or so.

I often think if I am a proper developer and what am I doing all this
for, then I take this handy little quiz:

https://amiarealdeveloper.com/

We shall see where I am in a years time üëç

<!-- Links -->

[#100daysofcode]:
	https://medium.freecodecamp.com/start-2017-with-the-100daysofcode-improved-and-updated-18ce604b237b

<!-- Images -->

[gollum]:
	https://res.cloudinary.com/defkmsrpw/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/v1614930928/scottspence.com/gollum-41380a3023ea4dbe9e3e83abd7631843.jpg
[fcc breakdown]:
	https://res.cloudinary.com/defkmsrpw/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/v1614930932/scottspence.com/fccbreakdown-95e36e149f280ce66a0f04667dbbd265.jpg
