---
date: 2023-06-12
title: Customising Fonts in Tailwind CSS and daisyUI
tags: ['css', 'tailwind', 'how-to', 'daisyui', 'sveltekit']
isPrivate: true
---

Tailwind is awesome n' all but what do you do when you want to change
the default fonts. I've spent a bit of time customising this site to
use local fonts above the default used in Tailwind CSS. In this post
I'll go over adding in new fonts for Tailwind and also extending the
daisyUI themes.

In this post I'll detail adding custom fonts to a SvelteKit project
and also extending the daisyUI themes.

If you not familiar, [daisyUI] is a plugin for Tailwind that adds a
ton of additional utility classes component classes to enable you to
move fast when building sites.

## Local fonts

Ok, so I wanted to use fonts above the default that comes with
Tailwind. In the past I've added the files for the fonts I wanted to
use in a `static` or `public` folder and then used `@font-face` to
load them into the `app.css` file for Tailwind to use.

Then I found out about [Fontsource] (thanks to Matia) which is
basically Google fonts that you install as dependencies.

## Extend Tailwind theme

I'll tackle adding fonts into Tailwind first. I'll spin up a new
SvelteKit project and install Tailwind and daisyUI using `svelte-add`,
terminal commands are:

```bash
pnpm create svelte sveltekit-local-fonts
cd sveltekit-local-fonts
npx svelte-add@latest tailwindcss --daisyui --typography
```

I also did a post a while back on [how to set up Svelte with Tailwind]
if you want to have a bit more detail on it.

I'll also want to install the fonts I want to use from [Fontsource] so
I'll install them now too:

```bash
pnpm i -D @fontsource/poppins @fontsource/victor-mono
```

I want these fonts to be available to Tailwind so in the `app.postcss`
file generated by `svelte-add` I've added in the fonts I want to use:

```css
@import '@fontsource/victor-mono/400-italic.css';
@import '@fontsource/victor-mono/700-italic.css';
@import '@fontsource/victor-mono/400.css';
@import '@fontsource/victor-mono/700.css';
@import '@fontsource/poppins/400.css';
@import '@fontsource/poppins/500.css';
@import '@fontsource/poppins/600.css';
@import '@fontsource/poppins/700.css';
@import '@fontsource/poppins/800.css';
@import '@fontsource/poppins/900.css';

@tailwind base;
@tailwind components;
@tailwind utilities;
```

Just note that I've seen the imports being used without the weights
specified but when I have tried this way they are not rendered.

Now that the fonts are available to Tailwind I can use them in the
`tailwind.config.cjs`, Tailwind gives you three font family options to
use `sans`, `serif` and `mono`.

I just want to use Poppins for the `sans` option and Victor Mono for
`mono`.

```js
const config = {
  content: ['./src/**/*.{html,js,svelte,ts}'],

  theme: {
    extend: {
      fontFamily: {
        sans: ['Poppins', ...tailwind_theme.fontFamily.sans],
        mono: ['Victor Mono', ...tailwind_theme.fontFamily.mono],
        // or name them
        // 'victor-mono': ['Victor Mono'],
        // poppins: ['Poppins'],
      },
    },
  },

  plugins: [typography, daisyui],
}
```

In the example above I'm using the default names for the font families
there's also the option to name them yourself, I've commented out the
lines to show you how.

If for some reason the local font is not available then I'll want to
fallback to the defaults offered by Tailwind. That's why I'm spreading
in the rest of the font families from Tailwind.

Here's the full `tailwind.config.cjs` and you can see where I'm
pulling out the `defaultTheme` from Tailwind as a variable and
spreading the `sans` and `mono` font families into the
`theme.extend.fontFamily` object for each font family.

```js
const daisyui = require('daisyui')
const typography = require('@tailwindcss/typography')
const tailwind_theme = require('tailwindcss/defaultTheme')

/** @type {import('tailwindcss').Config}*/
const config = {
  content: ['./src/**/*.{html,js,svelte,ts}'],

  theme: {
    extend: {
      fontFamily: {
        sans: ['Poppins', ...tailwind_theme.fontFamily.sans],
        mono: ['Victor Mono', ...tailwind_theme.fontFamily.mono],
        // or name them
        // 'victor-mono': ['Victor Mono'],
        // poppins: ['Poppins'],
      },
    },
  },

  plugins: [typography, daisyui],
}

module.exports = config
```

## Extend daisyUI theme

I touched on daisyUI at the start, what I didn't mention is that it
comes with 29 themes out of the box. All but `cyberpunk` and
`wireframe` use a different font.

Why do I bring that up? Well, with the Tailwind theme already having
the fonts this means that it will be the same font for all the daisyUI
themes.

The default theme you get with daisyUI is `dark`, in this example I
want to cycle through several of the themes. To do that I'll need to
add in a theme select component and use a theme change package (also
from the creator of daisyUI) I'll install it now:

```bash
pnpm i -D theme-change
```

I'll create a theme select component with some of the themes I want to
cycle through. I'll keep `dark` in there also add in `light` and
`cyberpunk`.

I'll scaffold out the component as a select and add in the options for
the theme names I want to use:

```bash
# -p created the parent directory if it doesn't exist
mkdir src/lib/components -p
touch src/lib/theme-select.svelte
```

<!-- Links -->

[daisyUI]: https://daisyui.com/
[sveltekit-local-fonts]:
  https://github.com/spences10/sveltekit-local-fonts
[fontsource]: https://fontsource.org
[daisyUI themes]:
  https://github.com/saadeghi/daisyui/blob/498f6af3a9723b940ed0f119a7b29049ef3c45a9/src/theming/themes.js
[discussion pouya answered]:
  https://github.com/saadeghi/daisyui/discussions/653#discussioncomment-2438428
[tailwind play example]:
  https://play.tailwindcss.com/LzYodJ0VMd?file=config
[how to set up svelte with tailwind]:
  https://scottspence.com/posts/how-to-set-up-svelte-with-tailwind
