---
date: 2021-12-27
title: Keychron Q1 - First Impressions
tags: ['hardware']
isPrivate: false
---

I've now gone through quite a few mechanical keyboards in a relatively
short time. The first couple of times were to replace the current
faulty one I was using. This time around it was more of a
sustainability decision than a replacement.

I'll do a quick run-down of the history of the keyboards I've had that
got me to this point! I got the [Logitech G815] because I had issues with
the Ctrl key on the [HAVIT KB395L].

I got the [Logitech G915] as it seemed like a logical next step from there
for me because I didn't really vibe with the Logitech macro keys on the
far left of the board.

The G915 was (and still is) a really nice board to type on.

[![keychron-q1-keyboard]] [keychron-q1-keyboard]

## Why change from the G915

The G915 was what I thought to be my "end game" board. It had the
media controls on it, which was a main decision in me getting it. It
also had the super nice low profile Kailh switches I really liked
typing on.

<!-- cSpell:ignore kailh -->

The only thing is with a factory made board like this, if there's
issues with one of the switches, you can't just replace it. So, say
the Ctrl key starts playing up again (which it did). There's two
options, open up the keyboard to replace the broken part. Or replace
the entire keyboard.

When this happened I did a bit of research and found a couple of
YouTube videos:

- [Logitech G915 Disassembly]
- [Logitech G815 Disassembly]:

There's a whole lot of screws that comes out of that board! Also other
things like a heat gun you'd need (or hair drier) a soldering iron and
sourcing the new parts!

## Let's go custom!

So, I decided the best way to keep a keyboard for more than 18 months
without it breaking and having to possibly have to break out a
soldering iron was to get a keyboard that would be easily serviceable.

From looking at subreddits for mechanical keyboards this looks like it
can be a bonkers expensive hobby. Something I really want to avoid!

The main criteria for me on a new board would be:

- Easily change parts when they break
- Media controls built into the board
- 75% size, so full size without the number pad

I really, really liked the volume roller on the G915 and the G815 so
something that had some form of manual volume adjustment was also on
that list.

## There's a lot to choose from

When it comes to mechanical keyboards, there's a lot to choose from.
But not a lot to choose from if you want an ISO keyboard!

I still really like the ISO keyboard layout (large enter key) and
there's surprisingly few boards out there that I could choose from.

The two candidates I found after searching was the [Keychron Q1] and the
[GMMK Pro].

<!-- cSpell:ignore gmmk -->

From what I could glean from YuTube videos they both had the same
volume knob on the top right of the board. I found out later that
neither of them shipped with the knob! That was a mod you had to do
yourself.

Both options didn't ship a fully built board either so I had to go
about seeing if I could get the parts I really needed.

GMMK have a really nice customiser option on their site where you can
pick every detail of the board you want. This was only for ANSI boards
though and the ISO option was a bit more complicated.

I had to go through the ANSI customiser and pick the parts I needed
then try translate that into the ISO option.

Keychron was a similar option with only a barebone ISO board on offer.
With both options for the barebone option you get the case and the
Printed Circuit Board (PCB). You still have to get switches and
keycaps.

So the Keychron Q1 was what I settled on after watching many, many
YouTube videos! There were some issues with the Keychron case sounding
"pingy" but the reviewers said this was going to get fixed in the
production boards.

<!-- cSpell:ignore pingy -->

## Switches

The main reason I wanted a custom keyboard was to have the ability to
change the switches, but what switches do I go for?

If you are going down this path and have watched any YouTube videos on
customising keyboards, you'll see there's a lot of attention when it
comes to making the switches sound "nice".

There'll be whole sections of the videos where they're disassembling
the switches and adding film to them then applying lubricant to them
to get the nice feel.

I just want to be able to bang in the switches and not worry about it!
ðŸ˜Š

The happy medium for me was to get switches that come lubed already!
If you are paying attention to any of the videos then they will always
say it's better to lube them yourself, but I really don't have the
time or patience to do that!

When going through the GMMK option I saw they sold pre-lubed switches
GMMK Pandas. Which they sell in packs of 36 for some reason?? So I had
to get 3 packs of switches to make up the whole board.

<!-- cSpell:ignore clicky -->

I have always liked the blue clicky switches from the Logitech G915
but I do know that they can get super loud and annoying. The pandas
seemed like a good compromise with the tactility of a blue without the
clack!

## Keycaps

One of the main reasons for going with the Keychron Q1 over the GMMK
Pro was the selection of keycaps that were available for the Q1.

After doing some research on keycaps I found that they can get crazy
expensive! Like $500 for a set! That, then there's also the risk that
you might not have all the caps for your board!

## What about the ping?

The ping wasn't really present in the board I got from Keychron. There
was an additional layer of foam in the base of the keyboard I got
which filled up the gap that was causing the "ping" reported by
reviewers.

I did get some masking tape to put on the back of the PCB if I did
hear a "ping" but I found another mod that suggested adding a tiny
sliver of tape next to each of the mounting screws, which I did.

[![keychron-q1-backplate-with-tape]] [keychron-q1-backplate-with-tape]

You can see the imprint of the PCB on the foam there, so it's a really
tight fit with the additional layer of foam in there.

[![keychron-q1-backplate-and-pcb]] [keychron-q1-backplate-and-pcb]

## Programmable with Via and QMK

One of the best features of the Keychron Q1 and the GMMK Pro is
support for both Via and QMK. These are open source programs that
allow you to add additional functionality to the board and to remap
keys.

One of my concerns was media controls, these are on the F keys row on
the top row of the board. So, play, pause, previous/next track, volume
up/down and mute. So holding down the `fn` key and pressing one of
them controls the media.

What I did find was that the key combination of the `fn` key and then
reaching up to the top of the board with the same hand was a bit of a
reach, that or I used my other hand.

With Via I have kept the media keys in place and also added additional
keys to control media which are located a lot closer to the `fn` key.

The Via GUI shows four layers, layers 0-1 are for Mac, 2-3 for
Windows/Linux. Layers 0 and 2 are for the normal keys you would have
and layers 1 and 3 are for the function (`fn`) keys.

Here you can see I've added the media controls around the function key
for one handed use:

[![via-function-layer]] [via-function-layer]

## But what's it like to use?

Honestly, it's nice to type on, the slight elevation of the keyboard
meant a bit of adjustment but I've not suffered from any RSI on it.
Something I was worried about when you take a look at the elevation of
the Q1 compared to the G915.

<!-- cSpell:ignore ligitech -->

[![elevation-comparison-keychron-q1-ligitech-g915]]
[elevation-comparison-keychron-q1-ligitech-g915]

The GMMK panda switches are nice to type on the tactile bump is there
and as someone that listens to music while typing I don't really miss
the clicking.

With the smaller size of the board there's some of the cluster of keys
missing above the arrow keys you can see in the size comparison here:

[![size-comparison-keychron-q1-ligitech-g915]]
[size-comparison-keychron-q1-ligitech-g915]

I've not really missed any of them to be honest, the one thing I had
to map to a function key was the Print key, which I only really use
for taking a window screenshot!

## Purchasing

If I had to go through the same process again I'd still get the
Keychron Q1, but, instead of purchasing the GMMK Pandas I'd probably
gone through a different supplier. The switches took a really long
time in shipping. I'll avoid getting anything through GMMK in the
future.

This isn't really something I'd want to invest a great deal more of my
time researching and doing. If I do need to get new switches or
keycaps I'll research suppliers that ship from my region in Europe.

For keycaps I purchased the three that were available from Keychron
that were made for the Q1. If they make any more in the future then
I'll probably purchase through them.

[![keychron-q1-keycap-sets]] [keychron-q1-keycap-sets]

One word of warning with Keychron is if you get a keycap set through
them then check the contents. I had an arrow key missing from one of
the sets. I informed them about it and they were happy to ship the
missing part. Although it still hasn't turned up yet!

## Conclusion

I'm really happy with the ability to add any additional functionality
I need with the software available in Via. If there are any issues
with any part of the board I can open it up and troubleshoot any
issues with the Via Key Tester.

If there need to be a switch replaced then it's a simple case of
taking off the keycap and pulling out the switch and replacing it. If
there are any issues with the PCB I can reach out to Keychron to get a
replacement.

So far I have not seen any negatives from using the board for a couple
of months now.

If you're in a similar situation then I'd recommend getting a board
where you an swap out any parts which are causing issues.

<!-- Links -->

[logitech g815]: https://scottspence.com/posts/logitech-g815
[logitech g915]: https://scottspence.com/posts/logitech-g915
[havit kb395l]: https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/B0767YQQTQ
[logitech g915 disassembly]:
	https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qLvvMJYUWdE
[logitech g815 disassembly]:
	https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C32VZ6SDTCE
[keychron q1]:
	https://www.keychron.com/products/keychron-q1?variant=39406901362777
[gmmk pro]:
	https://www.pcgamingrace.com/products/glorious-gmmk-pro-75-barebone-iso-black-slate

<!-- Images -->

[keychron-q1-keycap-sets]:
	https://res.cloudinary.com/defkmsrpw/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/v1640685653/scottspence.com/keychron-q1-keycap-sets.jpg
[keychron-q1-backplate-and-pcb]:
	https://res.cloudinary.com/defkmsrpw/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/v1640685405/scottspence.com/keychron-q1-backplate-and-pcb.jpg
[size-comparison-keychron-q1-ligitech-g915]:
	https://res.cloudinary.com/defkmsrpw/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/v1640685392/scottspence.com/size-comparison-keychron-q1-ligitech-g915.jpg
[keychron-q1-backplate-with-tape]:
	https://res.cloudinary.com/defkmsrpw/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/v1640685356/scottspence.com/keychron-q1-backplate-with-tape.jpg
[elevation-comparison-keychron-q1-ligitech-g915]:
	https://res.cloudinary.com/defkmsrpw/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/v1640685355/scottspence.com/elevation-comparison-keychron-q1-ligitech-g915.jpg
[via-function-layer]:
	https://res.cloudinary.com/defkmsrpw/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/v1640685101/scottspence.com/via-function-layer.png
[keychron-q1-keyboard]:
	https://res.cloudinary.com/defkmsrpw/image/upload/q_auto,f_auto/v1640686830/scottspence.com/keychron-q1-keyboard.jpg
