---
date: 2023-01-07
title: Why Fastmail over ProtonMail
tags: ['mail', 'fastmail', 'protonmail', 'domains']
isPrivate: false
---

I've now been using Fastmail for a year now. I was using ProtonMail
previously but decided to migrate to Fastmail. I'm going to go into
the details of _why_ I switched. This is personal preference and my
reasoning behind the switch.

For full disclosure,I had tried Zoho mail for a short time before
Proton mail but quickly moved to ProtonMail for some of the reasons I
moved from ProtonMail to Fastmail.

I'm not affiliated with either of these and I still use ProtonVPN.

Here's my reasoning for the switch.

## Masked emails

First up for me was the 1Password integration to mask my email
address. This means any new website I register with I'm prompted by
1Password if I'd like to create a masked email address to use on
signup.

I was fed up with signing up to websites then getting spammed with
marketing emails. The masked emails this means I can quickly identify
where an email has come from and if it's not from the intended sender
I can delete the masked email and any further emails from that address
go straight to the email bin.

In my old age I'm getting more and more fed up with these types of
emails, ironic, for someone that's just setup with a new email
marketing provider ðŸ˜‚

## Custom domains

Setting up a custom domain was straightforward enough with Fastmail. I
did document [Setting up Fastmail with Vercel] if you're interested in
the process.

With ProtonMail it was pretty much the same process which I documented
[Setting up ProtonMail with Vercel].

I will come onto why this was a factor in the next section.

## Clear pricing

Fastmail has clear, understandable pricing. There's three tiers,
Basic, Standard and Professional. Each one listing what you get for
your money.

I found with ProtonMail I was wading through pricing structures and
addons which made no sense and I was quickly lost on what I was
actually paying for.

The ProtonVPN made this really confusing. I now use ProtonVPN with a
clear pricing model, with ProtonMail they say it's included but as
I've said already it was really confusing on knowing exactly what you
were getting.

## Ease of use

Fastmail gets out of your way, set up folders simply, you're not
prompted with additional modals or pop-ups which I found frustrating
with ProtonMail.

You can set up filters and rules after you make the folder in Fastmail
which is easy to understand and doesn't force you to go through a
setup flow.

## User interface

As with the ease of use of Fastmail, the user interface is simple and
easy to understand with intuitive context menus.

I rarely have to visit the Fastmail documentation on how to do
something.

## Migrating from Proton mail

ProtonMail prides itself on being completely secure, this is an issue
when you want to migrate data from one provider to another though.

They provide a Proton bridge tool for you to download and configure to
export the data.

I remember it was a pain in the arse messing around with the Proton
bridge. It's a secure connection to your ProtonMail from your
computer. So secure that I couldn't actually get any useable data! ðŸ˜‚

When you actually get the data exported, it's in a format that is not
useable in Fastmail.

I literally had to send myself the emails I wanted to keep.

<!--  Links -->

[setting up fastmail with vercel]:
	https://scottspence.com/posts/setting-up-fastmail-with-vercel
[setting up protonmail with vercel]:
	https://scottspence.com/posts/setting-up-proton-mail-with-vercel
