---
title:
  'Infrastructure, MCP Tools, and Developer Ergonomics - October 2025'
date: 2025-10-28
published: true
---

Hey! How's it going? This is the October 2025 edition of my _now_
monthly newsletter I'll be doing this to share what I've been working
on, learning and building.

So, as you'll see from this, currently this newsletter is a summary of
all my GitHub activity, just so I have something to reflect on
personally, you can look at the commits on this repo to see what I've
been up to! Essentially, I'm getting all my GitHub activity (commits,
PRs, issues, releases) and feeding that into Claude to generate a
monthly newsletter. It's a bit meta, but it's a start!

If it weren't for AI this newsletter wouldn't exist, so shout out to
Claude for making this possible.

October was split between private client infrastructure work and
building tools that scratch my own development itches. The month
started with a SQLite corruption investigation that turned into a
learning experience about database backups, then shifted to creating
MCP tools/CLIs for Claude to use and refactoring
[Devhub.party](https://devhub.party) to actually work!

The technical split was roughly 40% private infrastructure and
monorepo work, 30% MCP tool development, and 30% CRM refactoring.

Private work dominated the commit count - building PDF generation
systems via a CLI for Claude to use (Claude loves using tools!!),
working with CSV pipelines (for the Claude CLI), and implementing
database utilities for client projects along with infra work for
improved CI/CD.

## Highlights

Three threads ran through the month: database reliability, MCP tooling
ecosystem, and component architecture.

### SQLite Corruption and Database Backups

I noticed my site's popular posts weren't displaying and discovered
I'd corrupted my SQLite database. Wrote up the full investigation in
[SQLite Corruption with fs.copyFile() in WAL Mode](https://scottspence.com/posts/sqlite-corruption-fs-copyfile-issue) -
the short version is that `fs.copyFile()` doesn't respect WAL mode's
locking semantics. The fix involved implementing an SQLite backup API
using the native `.backup()` method and setting up automated backups
through cron jobs. This turned into a pattern I've since reused across
projects.

### MCP Tool Development

I built several MCP tools to improve Claude Code workflows.
`mcp-sqlite-tools` adds SQLite handling with connection management and
schema operations. `mcp-omnisearch` brings web search to Claude with
support for multiple providers and search operators.
`claude-skills-cli` (not an MCP!) gives Claude guardrails to follow
when creating `SKILL.md` files. Each of these tools solves a specific
friction point (for me!) when working with AI assistants.

### Devhub CRM Architecture

I spent the latter half of October rebuilding
[Devhub](https://devhub.party) CRM with Better Auth and Remote
Functions. The authentication implementation was straightforward:
email/password auth with session management using SvelteKit remote
functions.

The GitHub integration for importing contacts is what I'm really happy
about! There's also a QR code generator for profile sharing.

## Blog Posts

Two posts on [scottspence.com](https://scottspence.com) and I've
already discussed the SQLite corruption issue.

### MCP Server Context Optimisation

I wrote about reducing MCP tool context usage in
[Optimising MCP Server Context Usage in Claude Code](https://scottspence.com/posts/optimising-mcp-server-context-usage-in-claude-code).
This is when I started a Claude Code session and noticed it was
consuming 66,000+ tokens before typing a word. The fix involved
aggressive description pruning, removing redundant documentation, and
consolidating tool definitions.

### Component Testing Patterns

With the Vitest v4 release I updated
[sveltest.dev](https://sveltest.dev) to use the new patterns.

With that then updated Devhub from `@testing-library/svelte` to
`vitest-browser-svelte`.

### Database and Schema Management

I implemented migration handling with schema initialisation for
[Devhub](https://devhub.party) and
[scottspence.com](https://scottspence.com). Rather than complex
migration tools, I used simple SQL files executed on startup.

## Open Source

Public work focused on documentation and tooling.

### MCP Tools Ecosystem

I do a fair bit of tooling for MCP! Released updates to
[`mcp-sqlite-tools`](https://github.com/spences10/mcp-sqlite-tools)
(v0.0.15) optimising tool descriptions and fixing multi-statement SQL
handling.

I updated
[`mcp-omnisearch`](https://github.com/spences10/mcp-omnisearch) search
operators after the
[context usage learnings](https://scottspence.com/posts/optimising-mcp-server-context-usage-in-claude-code).

Created [`mcpick`](https://github.com/spences10/mcpick) (v0.0.4), a
CLI for managing MCP server configurations as I was cheesed off with
having to manually edit the `.claude.json` every time I wanted to swap
out an MCP tool.

Built
[`claude-skills-cli`](https://github.com/spences10/claude-skills-cli)
because Claude can't help itself when you ask it to write a document
it goes bananas!.

### Vitest v4 Migration

Mentioned already! But updated [`sveltest`](https://sveltest.dev) for
Vitest v4, changing imports from `@vitest/browser/context` to
`vitest/browser`. Added migration guides explaining the breaking
changes. Updated test examples and configuration files.

## Phew!

That's quite a lot! I have edited this from what Claude generated!
what do you think? Too much? Too vague? Let me know!

Thanks for reading, catch you next month!
